# Machine Learning Algorithms on Census Income Data Prediction

## Tool and Resources Used 
**R Studio:**   
**Packages:** ggplot2, plyr, gridExtra, gmodels, grid, vcd, scales, ggthemes, knitr, readxl, funModeling, Hmisc, skimr

**Data Sources:** 
https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/census+income

## Problem and Goal
The problem of income inequality has become a part of a huge concern for everyone in the world. The purpose of this project is two fold. First, construct a model that can predict whether an individual’s annual income is lesser or greater than $50,000 dollars, based on given attributes, and provide a solution to the income inequality problem by using machine learning and data mining techniques. And second, perform a comprehensive analysis to find out the key factors that are essential in benefiting the population's income in general.

## Data Mining Task and Algorithms
In this project we will use four different supervised machine learning algorithms - logistic regression, random forest, decision tree, and support vector machine (SVM). We will compare if these algorithms give approximately the same prediction accuracy and select the best fit predictive model, in the end.

We will trace the following steps in our project: get the data, explore and clean the data, use exploratory data analysis to identify patterns and relationships in the data, build the prediction model, validate the prediction model, conduct an analysis of the prediction accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and computational time of the fitted models.

We will also use a classification approach to identify if an individual’s annual income is lesser or greater than $50,000. Thus, we can assume that there are two outcomes, less than $50,000 dollars a year (Y = 0) and more than $50,000 dollars a year (Y = 1).

## Evaluation and Comparison
As this is a classification problem, we will use F1 scores, confusion matrix and receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve to evaluate and compare the performance of different predictive models.

## Data Plan
The UCI Machine Learning Repository Adult Dataset has been used for this purpose. Barry Becker extracted this data by using the 1994 Census database. There are 14 attributes for 42 counties and a total of 32,561 observations in this dataset. Within the 14 attributes, 8 of them are categorical (workclass, education, marital status, occupation, relationship, race, sex, and native country) while 6 of them are continuous (age, fnlwgt, education num, capital gain, capital loss and hours-per week).
Based on the given attributes, a new column was created to determine whether an individual makes more than $50,000 dollars a year (1) or less than $50,000 dollars a year (0). We will also split the dataset into a training set (75%) and testing set (25%).

## Data Processing
*	**Data Cleaning**
*	**Handling Missing Values**
*	**Data Transformation**
*	**Dummy Variable**
*	**Splitting**
*	**Handling Missing Values**

## Exploratory Data Analysis

## Correlation Matrix
*	**Income and Age**
*	**Income and Gender**
*	**Income and Working Hours Per Week**
*	**Income and Workclass**

## Experiments on Models
*	**ANOVA Chi-square Test**
*	**Forward and Backward Stepwise Regression**
*	**Cross Validation Decision Tree**

## Evaluation and Comparisons
*	**Accuracy**
*	**Root Mean Square Error(RMSE)**
*	**F1 Score**
*	**AUC Curve**
*	**ROC Curve**
*	**Confusion Matrix**
*	**Precision**
*	**Specificity**
*	**Computational Time**

In conclusion, we used several Machine Learning models and concluded with an accuracy of 86.3%, RMSE of .370, precision of .932, specificity of .761, sensitivity of .890 and F1 Score of .105 with random forest and maximum AUC of .913. 

## Conclusions and Future Work
Random forest is known for its robustness and less sensitivity. As expected, random forest and decision tree performed the best followed by support vector machine and logistic regression. This is preferable as we aim to make the models as simple as possible, parsimony, and the results, where the simpler models actually performed better, aligned with our goal.

Going forward, there are a lot of different areas that can be carried out. In our study, we admit possible limitations. One of the main limitations of this study was that the data used in this study was not the recent census data. In order to make the models more applicable for today’s society, future studies should, therefore, extend the scope of this research by gathering the up to date census data.

It is clear that as new information is constantly generated by people, further studies could use these updated data to investigate other relative efficacy variables on income in the United States. It is also expected that future research will explore other advanced preprocessing methods and datasets from different countries to see the differences of country-based income prediction. 
